# NMPC-Based Reinforcement Learning for Real-World Chemical Process Control: A Batch Distillation Case Study
This repository contains the implementation of the the methods and results presented in the paper:
> **NMPC-Based Reinforcement Learning for Real-World Chemical Process Control: A Batch Distillation Case Study**  
> Torben Talis, Dean Brandner, Erik Esche, Jens-Uwe Repke, Sergio Lucia, Christian Hoffmann

## Overview
This project provides the necessary implementations for reproduction of the results in the manuscript.
This includes all generation, training and visualtization scripts. 
This repository inludes:
1. High-fidelity model of the batch distillation column,
2. Zeroth order parameter estimation via Bayesian optimization of the high-fidelity model of the batch distillation column,
3. Sampling of training data for the control-oriented surrogate model via APRBS,
4. Training a control-oriented surrogate model based on this data,
5. Training a parameterized NMPC policy in an uncertainty aware environment in a simulative RL loop,
6. Application to the real batch distillation plant.
7. All necessary plotting utilities
 
## Repository structure
```text
NMPC-RL-ChemicalProcessControl/
|-- agents/
|   +-- Here will be the agents.txt
|-- data/
|   |-- experimentaldata/
|   |-- LVcolumn_DAE_init/
|   |-- LVcolumn_experiment_controlled/
|   |-- LVcolumn_Sampling/
|   |-- validation/
|   |   |-- trained/
|   |   |   +-- 2026_05_08_trainedagent_MPC.py
|   |   +-- untrained/
|   |       +-- 2026_05_08_untrainedagent_MPC.py
|   +-- Here will be the data.txt
|-- initialization_convergence_study/
|   +-- convergence_study_parallel.py
|-- models/
|   |-- batchcol_model_dompc.py
|   |-- batchcol_model_dompc_pe_init.py
|   +-- simulate_init_recipe.py
|-- parameter_estimation/
|   |-- Results/
|   |   +-- Here will be the Results.txt
|   |-- parameter_estimation.py
|   |-- plot_BO_probes.ipynb
|   |-- plot_pe_results.py
|   |-- rawdata.py
|   +-- replotfigures.py
|-- surr_models/
|   +-- Here will be the surr_models.txt
|-- .gitignore
|-- _model_for_rl.py
|-- _rl_simulator.py
|-- APRBS.py
|-- environment.py
|-- helper.py
|-- LICENSE
|-- mp_utils.py
|-- narx_functions.py
|-- narx_system_handler.py
|-- optimizer.py
|-- README.md
|-- replay_buffer.py
|-- results.ipynb
|-- RL_MPC.py
|-- rl_mpc_agents_stoch.py
|-- sample_data_for_surrogate.py
|-- structure.txt
|-- surrogate_mpc.py
|-- train_mpc_with_REINFORCE.py
|-- train_multistep_narx.ipynb
|-- transform_ic.py
|-- transform_to_do_mpc.py
+-- visualize_agent_experiment.ipynb
```

## Key components
### High-fidelity model of batch distillation
The high-fidelity model is implemented in do-mpc. It can be found in `models/batchcol_model_dompc.py`. This model is accessed several times. Among others, in `environment.py` and `parameter_estimation.py`

### Parameter estimation via Bayesian optimization
Run `parameter_estimation/parameter_estimation.py` to reproduce the results from the paper. For differnet settings run the `main()` function in that `parameter_estimation/parameter_estimation.py`. The results can be visualized by executing the Jupyter notebook `plot_BO_probes.ipynb`. Adjust `BO_probes_path` to point to the correct `*.csv` file.

### Data generation for control-oriented surrogate model
Data can be generated by running `sample_data_for_surrogate.py`. Adjust the number of parallel workers `n_processes` based on the availabe CPU and memory.

### Training the control-oriented surrogate model
Execute the Jupyter notebook `train_multistep_narx.ipynb` to train the surrogate model. Adjust `data_path` and `testdata_path` for the training and testing data based on the folder that the data is stored in. Figures are generated directly in this file. Once that the trained model is saved, it needs to be tranformed to do-mpc. For this purpose adjust `model_path` in `tranform_to_do_mpc.py` and execute the file.

### Training the parameterized NMPC policy via RL
Execute `train_mpc_with_REINFORCE.py` to train the NMPC-based RL agent. Adjust the number of parallel workers `n_mpc_processes` based on the availale CPU and memory. Adjust `mpc_model_path` and `agent_path` based on the previously created files. The training can be investigated by executing `results.ipynb`. Also in here, you may need to adjust `mpc_model_path` and `agent_path`. Figures are created in here.

### Operate the real batch distillation plant
You won't have the very same batch distillation column on your side but you could operate the plant using the trained and untrained agent by runnning `data/validation/trained/2026_05_08_trainedagent_MPC.py` and `data/validation/untrained/2026_05_08_untrainedagent_MPC.py`. The experiments can be visualized via `visualize_agent_experiments.ipynb`.

## Usage
### Prerequisites
Clone the repository, install python, and install all necessary dependencies via the requirements.txt file.

## License
This project is licensed under the GNU Lesser General Public License v3.0.
